Modify rule S2291: LAYC format (#2169)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S2291/csharp/rule.adoc

== Why is this an issue?

> The checked and unchecked https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/statements/checked-and-unchecked[statements] and https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/language-specification/expressions#12819-the-checked-and-unchecked-operators[operators] specify the https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integer_overflow[overflow]-checking context for integral-type arithmetic operations and conversions.

Reviewer: This is a nice explanation but I would move the

> Enumerable.Sum() always executes addition in a `checked` context

paragraph to the beginning and move this part into a subsection like `=== Background` or the `How does it work` section in `How to fix it`.

This means:

* When `unchecked` is specified, the operation result is truncated by discarding any high-order bits that don't fit in the destination type.
+
[source,csharp]
----
uint a = uint.MaxValue;

> unchecked(a = a + 1); // a+1 overflows, results in 0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unchecked(a = a + 1); // a + 1 overflows, results in 0
```

----

> * When `checked` is specified, an https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.overflowexception[OverflowException] is thrown for a run-time overflow, and https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/misc/cs0220?f1url=%3FappId%3Droslyn%26k%3Dk(CS0220)[CS0220] compile-time error occurs for a constant overflow.

Reviewer: I don't think, we need to talk about compile time errors in our rules. In the case of this rule, there is no compile time error possible.
```suggestion
* When `checked` is specified, an https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.overflowexception[OverflowException] is thrown instead.
```

+
[source,csharp]
----
uint a = uint.MaxValue;
checked(a + 1); // run-time: OverflowException

const uint b = uint.MaxValue;

> checked(b + 1) // compile-time: Compiler Error CS0220

Reviewer: The examples and explanations are almost identical to what is written in https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/statements/checked-and-unchecked Do we really need this section? This is more like an explanation of a language feature than an education about a code smell / bug. I think we usually assume the user knows the language and link to "Learn Microsoft" as you already did. My personal opinion is, that the link is enough already. What do you think?

Author: Yes, what you say makes sense. I still struggle to find the balance of how explanatory I should be. Dropped the entire section.

----

> https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.linq.enumerable.sum[Enumerable.Sum()] always executes addition in a `checked` context, so an OverflowException will be thrown if the value exceeds `MaxValue`, even if an `unchecked` context was specified. Therefore, using this method inside an `unchecked` context will only make the code more confusing, since the behavior will still be `checked`.

Reviewer: It would be good to back that claim with a source (unfortunately we can not use footnotes 😢 ). You can either cite the exception section:
> [OverflowException](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.overflowexception?view=net-7.0)
The sum is larger than [Int32.MaxValue](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.int32.maxvalue?view=net-7.0).

or the source code

https://github.com/microsoft/referencesource/blob/51cf7850defa8a17d815b4700b67116e3fa283c2/System.Core/System/Linq/Enumerable.cs#L1408-L1415

This link should go into the Resources section.

== Why is this an issue?

> https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.linq.enumerable.sum[Enumerable.Sum()] always executes addition in a `checked` context, so an https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.overflowexception[OverflowException] will be thrown if the value exceeds `MaxValue`, even if an `unchecked` context was specified. Therefore, using this method inside an `unchecked` context will only make the code more confusing, since the behavior will still be `checked`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.linq.enumerable.sum[`Enumerable.Sum()`] always executes addition in a `checked` context, so an https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.overflowexception[OverflowException] will be thrown if the value exceeds `MaxValue`, even if an `unchecked` context was specified. Therefore, using this method inside an `unchecked` context will only make the code more confusing, since the behavior will still be `checked`.
```

Reviewer: I don't know: https://sonarsource.slack.com/archives/C04P0SB2KJP/p1686642571396659 There is a meeting today with the documentation team where I will bring this up as well.

  {
    try 
    {
      int total = list.Sum();
    } 
    catch (System.OverflowException e) 
    {
      // Exception handling    
    }
  }
}
----

== How to fix it

Remove the `unchecked` operator/statement, and optionally add some exception handling for the `OverflowException`.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,csharp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
void Add(List<int> list)
{
  int total1 = unchecked(list.Sum());  // Noncompliant

  unchecked 
  {
    int total2 = list.Sum();  // Noncompliant
  }
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,csharp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
void Add(List<int> list)
{
  int total1 = list.Sum();

  try 
  {
    int total2 = list.Sum();
  } 
  catch (System.OverflowException e) 
  {
    // Exception handling
  }
}
----

== Resources

=== Documentation

> * https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.linq.enumerable.sum[Enumerable.Sum Method]
> * https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/statements/checked-and-unchecked[checked and unchecked statements]
> * https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/language-specification/expressions#12819-the-checked-and-unchecked-operators[checked and unchecked operators]
> * https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/fundamentals/exceptions/[Exceptions and Exception Handling]
> * https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.overflowexception[OverflowException Class]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.linq.enumerable.sum[`Enumerable.Sum` Method]
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/statements/checked-and-unchecked[`checked` and `unchecked` statements]
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/language-specification/expressions#12819-the-checked-and-unchecked-operators[`checked` and `unchecked` operators]
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/fundamentals/exceptions/[Exceptions and Exception Handling]
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.overflowexception[`OverflowException` Class]
```

> * https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/misc/cs0220?f1url=%3FappId%3Droslyn%26k%3Dk(CS0220)[Compiler Error CS0220]

Reviewer: Not needed.
```suggestion
```
